[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
Could we be living
inside a hologram?
What really is a
hologram anyhow?
Let's explore both the
physics and metaphysics
of holographic being and
what that means for us.
First of all, what
is a hologram?
We've all seen that shiny image
of a dove on the back of a visa
credit card, or the
hologram trading
cards of our favorite
superheroes when we were kids.
These are two-dimensional
films that
have three-dimensional
information encoded in them.
And when light shines on
them in the right way,
we can see the image as if
it is three dimensional.
The word, itself,
gives us insight
into what a hologram is.
It comes from the ancient
Greek words holos and gramma.
Holos means hole,
while gramma means
that which is drawn or
written as in a picture,
or a drawing, an alphabetical
letter, or piece of writing
that contains a message.
Plus, a hologram is
an image or a message
that depicts the whole.
And there are two main defining
features of a hologram.
First, every part contains the
same pattern or information
as the whole.
If we break off a piece
of a holographic plate,
and then shine light onto
it, just that fragment,
it will still contain
the whole image.
In this regard, it is
fractal-like or recursive,
meaning it doesn't matter how
small of a scale we go to,
it will still contain the whole
pattern within each piece.
A large amount of information
is contained in a hologram.
The second defining
feature is that a hologram
is a projection from a
lower-dimensional encoding
of information about a
higher-dimensional reality.
An easy way to
think about this is
what happens when we go
to the movie theater.
The movie we see on the
screen is a projection
from light shining through
the film in the movie reel.
That film is imprinted
with images and information
from the studio
recordings of real people
acting out their parts.
The real people are three
dimensional in this case,
but the film is two dimensional.
And we watch that
movie being projected
onto a two-dimensional
screen as well.
So this example is
not holographic,
but it gives us an idea of
what is meant by a projection
from a lower-dimensional
encoding of information
about a higher-dimensional
reality.
If the movie were recorded
using holographic methods,
our experience of
watching the movie
might be more like what's
depicted in, perhaps,
the holodeck of Star Trek.
We often hear talk of raising
up to higher dimensions.
And what is meant by dimension?
Let's define this
word so that we can
be clear about what we mean.
Dimensions, the way we usually
relate to them in science,
mean coordinates
within spacetime
that measure height, width,
depth, duration, and so forth.
A single reference point
is zero dimensional.
Let's call that the origin.
Two points define
a line or direction
creating one dimension.
Two lines at
perpendicular directions
form a flat plain,
giving us two dimensions.
And three perpendicular lines
create three dimensions,
and so on.
We can continue doing this
to get higher and higher
dimensions beyond our 3D world.
For example, here
is what is called
a hypercube or tesseract which
is a four-dimensional version
of a cube.
But in that four
dimensional reality,
it is also constantly moving
or folding and unfolding.
We can also look
at a torus which
is a four-dimensional
sphere or a cylinder
depending on how it's formed.
The shape of the torus
is found all over nature.
Anytime there is
a magnetic field
flowing between two poles, it
takes on the form of a torus.
This includes the energy
field around galaxies, stars,
planets, even us.
It is the shape and
dynamic flow of our aura.
Current string theories propose
that there is up to 10 or 11
spatial dimensions plus time.
However, since our senses
and perceptions are only
trained to be aware of
three dimensions, most of us
do not see the full
form of anything
from a higher dimension.
At best, we can see a
slice or projection of it
in our 3D experience,
kind of like a shadow.
We can easily grasp
this idea when
we look at a
three-dimensional object
and compare it to its different
projections onto 2D planes.
Such as a cylinder
that can be seen
as either a
rectangle or a circle
depending on which
two-dimensional perspective we
are viewing it from.
A four-dimensional tesseract
projected into our 3D awareness
could look like any
of these images,
among others, depending
on the perspective
and as current confirmation.
Most mandalas, from
either Eastern or Western
spiritual traditions, are also
two-dimensional projections
of 3D or
higher-dimensional forms.
One way to use this is
to visualize geometries
of different dimensions.
For example, we could start
by visualizing ourselves
at the center, or
somewhere inside of us
is the origin point.
Then from that center,
a line extends out--
let's say it goes
out about nine feet.
If we then rotate this
line clockwise around us,
it forms a two-dimensional
circle and the line
being the radius.
If we rotate the circle
again, only this time
around the axis of its radius,
then it will create a sphere.
Finally, we can fold that
sphere inward upon itself, down
through our central
core to make a torus,
then feel or see that
movement around us as well
as through our central core.
This is a really good
way to train our mind
and expand our awareness
to consciously work
with the sacred geometries
that are already a part of us.
As we do, we become
more aware of what
is happening in
our energy field,
and we also become
more multi-dimensional
in our consciousness.
So raising up to
higher dimensions
would be to become
consciously aware
of this multidimensional
reality around us.
However, some people also
use this phrase in relation
to shifting to higher
frequency levels which
is different than dimension.
Now, with this dimensional
awareness in mind,
the next question
we want to explore
is how to holograms really work?
It begins with a coherent
source of energy.
It could be laser light or
sound or some other type
of coherent energy wave.
This is directed to a dividing
mirror that then splits
the light into two paths.
One path sends that
light straight through,
and the other path sends
that light towards an object.
That object is then illuminated,
and the light scatters back off
of it, some of which
then recombines
with the light that went
straight through the mirror.
As these two light
streams recombine,
they form what is called
an interference pattern.
This interference pattern
is then imprinted or encoded
onto a holographic
film which captures
like a snapshot or a moment
in time of the object,
much like taking a
selfie or a picture.
Now, when some
other light source
shines onto that
holographic film,
that light then reflects off
of it carrying the information
of the holographic pattern.
Those light waves
travel to our eyes which
detect these signals
of information,
communicating that to our
brain, and then the brain
renders the
three-dimensional-like image
that we perceive before us.
As Buckminster Fuller put
it, "Everything we see
is inside our own heads."
It's similar to how
we see rainbows.
The rainbow is not out there,
the rainbow is in here.
And as Leonardo da Vinci
said, "All our knowledge
has its origin in
our perceptions."
Now, hold on, let's back
up here for a second.
Obviously, our experience of
this world is not like 3D,
it is 3D, and it
feels very real.
We can touch it, taste it,
hear it, smell it, see it.
We feel the pain and
pleasures from it, so
how can this be a hologram?
Well, let's apply
the same model,
but now let's take it up
to a higher dimension.
Remember in Star
Wars where R2-D2
projects a
three-dimensional hologram
movie of Princess Leia?
Or as mentioned before, we
could also think of the holodeck
experience in Star Trek?
What if there were some kind
of holographic substrate
similar to this that
was being projected
into our universe, the kind that
could record in time and space
and then project that into
an actual 3D experience.
And what if we could also have
a multi sensory interaction
with it, like we can now do
in some of our virtual reality
games.
I went to one of these
experiences called The Void
with a Star Wars theme.
And I was rather impressed
by how realistic it felt.
It was interactive.
It even had temperature
changes, smells,
and a vest that gave me a little
zap in the ribs every time
I got shot by a storm trooper.
I even yelped every
time I got zapped.
And we really felt like we were
in the Star Wars experience.
It wasn't perfect.
It wasn't like the "Matrix"
movies or "Ready Player One,"
but our technologies
are really coming along.
Anyhow, what if true reality
is a four-dimensional
or five-dimensional or even
higher-dimensional realm
and what we experience
here is just
a three-dimensional
holographic projection?
We don't need all the
fancy virtual reality gear
to have a sensory
experience of it.
All that would be needed is
to send the right signals
and information into our brain
to stimulate those perceptions.
Much like what
happens in our dreams,
dreams feel very real
when we are in them
even though we experience
things that would be
impossible in our waking life.
In a similar way, our
physical experience of life
feels very real, and
at some level it is,
but it's not the whole reality.
Our five physical
senses are only
attuned to the
three-dimensional world.
And even then, we only
perceive a small fraction
of the information available
in the physical world.
We can not rely on just
our physical senses
to inform us of what
true reality is.
Most people only
perceive about one octave
of the electromagnetic
spectrum that we
call visible light ranging
from red to violet in color.
But we know from science that
there are many more wavelengths
of electromagnetic
energy flowing all
around us all the time.
The same goes for other senses.
Each of them detect only a small
portion of the energy spectra
around us.
And what's more, most people
aren't even paying attention
to what's going on around them.
Their senses might be
picking up the signals,
but they are tuned out and not
aware of what's happening thus,
relying on subconscious
mind to process
all that information coming in.
Unfortunately, our
subconscious mind
is full of all
kinds of distortions
and faulty programming
that blocks or skews
our perceptions.
The subconscious then
influences our ego
and causes us to
perceive separation
between ourselves and others.
This perception of separation
is definitely an illusion.
Such lack of awareness
is a major thing
we need to train
ourselves out of.
It starts by paying attention
and not making assumptions.
We must train ourselves
to really look
and tune into what is
happening around us.
We must become consciously
aware of our environment
and ourselves if we want
to achieve inner mastery.
Then to start perceiving the
higher dimensional realities,
we also need to train
our intuitive senses,
our extrasensory
perception abilities.
First, we become aware
of subtle details
that we might ordinarily ignore.
The more we do this
through repetition,
the more we help
our brain to rewire
so that we can become better
at perceiving subtle energies.
The more we are aware of our
energy field and train our ESP,
or what we call our
spiritual senses,
we can then link this with
our five physical senses.
The more we do this,
the more we can
become like Superman or
Lucy with X-ray vision,
keen hearing, and access
to higher consciousness.
Only from higher
consciousness can
we move beyond perceiving
just the hologram.
Like in the "Matrix" movies,
when they get out of the Matrix
into Zion, they are able to see
the Matrix for what it really
is from the encoding level.
And from that
level of awareness,
we can learn to harness
the Matrix to become
more at cause, rather
than always at the effect.
Is this just science fiction?
Could it be science fact?
And where does consciousness
fit into all of this?
Whether or not it is true
still remains to be seen,
but there are many
fascinating questions
that this holographic
model brings up.
Let's turn to science now to see
how this holographic idea has
been implemented.
One of the first
theoretical physicists
to propose the
idea of a hologram
as a model for the universe
was David Bohm in the late '70s
and early '80s.
Bohm realized that
one of the only ways
to account for quantum
physics, general relativity,
and consciousness was to
start from what they all
have in common.
They all point to a
fundamental unbroken wholeness
or connectedness
in the universe.
His desire to tie these
together and move away
from the notion of
separation is what
led Bohm to propose what he
called the "implicate order."
He felt that one of the biggest
issues on the planet right
now is that we
continue to experience
greater levels of separation,
isolation, and fragmentation
of human consciousness.
This is very much an
issue in our world today,
perhaps, even more than ever.
What did Bohm mean by
an implicate order?
It's rather involved, but
let's use a simple analogy
to convey the idea.
Many of us have heard the
popular fable of the "Blind Men
and the Elephant."
Six blind men come across
an elephant, something they
have never encountered before.
And each one feels a
different part of the body.
One has a leg, another
a tusk, one an ear,
a knee, the snout,
the tail, and so on.
Each blind man devises his own
version of objective reality
to describe the
elephant, but it's
based on a very
limited experience
and partial perspective.
They each have part of the
truth but not the whole truth,
and their partial truths are
a far cry from describing
the actual elephant as a whole.
The outer form of the
body and its parts
are what Bohm might relate
to the explicate order--
the things we can experience,
perceive, and measure
in our sensory world.
Most of the laws of
physics thus far,
both classical and
quantum, mainly
refer to this explicate order.
Whereas, the whole
elephant, including
all the inner workings of its
body, life, and consciousness,
the things that we
can't see or touch,
this is like the
implicate order.
Within the implicate order
are all the deeper aspects
of an unbroken wholeness.
This implicate order is also
alive with constant motion.
As aspects come to
the surface, they
can be experienced or perceived
in the explicate order.
But when they are
enfolded back in,
they are part of
the implicate order.
Bohm wondered, how can
we explore or grasp
this implicate order,
the whole elephant?
And as a metaphor for
shifting our way of thinking,
he proposed a hologram model.
In Bohm's model, the explicate
order, or 3D-physical world
that we experience,
is like a projection
from a holographic encoding.
While the implicate order refers
to the higher-dimensional realm
where the original more whole
being resides, moves, and is
eliminated.
He says the explicate order or
hologram is part of the truth
but not the whole truth.
The whole truth is found within
the implicate order or higher
reality.
When Bohm proposed the hologram
idea in the late 1970s,
it was used as just a metaphor.
But could there be
more to it than that?
In the mid to late '90s,
other theoretical physicists
started using the hologram
idea as a mathematical way
to try to unite quantum
mechanics with gravity.
Briefly, they said these
two core pillars of physics
could be united if
we considered them
to be holographic projections
from a lower-dimensional
encoding of information.
For example, all the
information of a black hole
is encoded just in its
event horizon, which
is a two-dimensional surface.
They propose that any
three-dimensional volume
can be mathematically
described entirely
through the two-dimensional
boundary or surface
region that surrounds it.
This sounds complicated,
but one simple way for us
to relate to this
idea is to imagine
that all the information
about our entire body--
all its organs, its
nerves, everything--
is encoded on the
surface of our skin.
This boundary is where the
holographic information
is encoded.
This might not be
that far-fetched.
There are actually some ancient
systems of Eastern medicine
that do assess the qualities
of the skin to diagnose
issues inside the body.
One interesting consequence
of this holographic principle
is that it says that spacetime--
gravity, mass, and even energy--
are illusory.
In other words, everything
we perceive as real
is a kind of mirage.
They simply emerge
from the projection
of information encoded in the
lower-dimensional hologram
surface.
What does this mean?
What these scientists are saying
is that what is fundamental
is not the thing.
Rather, it's the
encoded information
that gives rise to the thing.
Let's repeat that.
Physicists are now saying that
the most fundamental component
of our universe and
everything in it
is not mass, not
gravity, not spacetime,
not even energy or subatomic
particles, it's information.
Does this mean that
this physical world
with all its mass, gravity,
space, time, and energy
is an illusion,
like many interpret
the spiritual philosophy
of Maya to mean?
Not exactly.
From a physics
perspective, we'd say
that this physicality that
we experience is real,
it's just not fundamental.
It's not the deepest reality.
Instead, we'd say it is emergent
from the information encoded
in the hologram,
while the deeper
reality or implicate order
is the level that controls
the encoding of the hologram.
At the same time,
there is an illusion,
and that, as
mentioned earlier, is
in our perception of reality.
This physical
world is real, it's
just not the whole reality.
Part of why we're in this
experience is to learn from it,
so it's best not to
dismiss it as not real.
But we should question our
perceptions and interpretation
of this physicality because
that is where the illusion lies.
Where might this information
that encodes the hologram
come from?
Some physicists
propose string theories
and end theory as
ways to accomplish
this encoding of information.
Recall that those
theories go all the way
up to 10 or 11 dimensions
to find the level where
things unify.
However, this science
still doesn't tell us
where information
comes from originally.
It tells us more of the how.
Other scientists propose
the information is encoded
upon the quantum
vacuum of empty space,
and that it comes
from the multiverse.
Quantum physics has
shown that what we think
of as real and solid is not.
It's made of
99.999999999% empty space.
Within that
so-called empty space
are fields of energy that are
constantly vibrating, moving,
shifting in and out of states.
We can think of them like waves
of energy on an endless sea.
As these waves intersect, they
form interference patterns
that modulate that quantum sea.
The waves and
interference patterns
contain the holographic
information.
But what if all the
information and stimuli
we experience in our
three-dimensional world
are not only waves?
What if they're
merely the surface
level of an infinite sea?
Have we become so
caught up in trying
to understand and navigate
the surface that we've
missed the fact that there
is a vast ocean full of life
and deeper realms
waiting to be explored?
This is what Bohm proposed.
He said that the implicate
order is the deeper ocean,
while the explicate order is
just the surface information.
He believed that when we began
to explore that deeper ocean,
that is when we will
find the true reality
that our whole world
is an image of.
Is using the holographic model
as just a metaphor or even
a mathematical trick to
unify physics equations,
is that as far as
this goes, or is there
a more literal
interpretation to it?
The first substantial
physical evidence
in support of our
universe being a hologram
came in 2017 when
scientists were finally
able to take a detailed look at
the cosmic microwave background
radiation.
They discovered, within this
afterglow of the Big Bang,
that there are encoded fractal
patterns of information.
These patterns seem to be
encoded within spacetime
itself, and they repeat
at almost all scales,
just like we'd expect to find
in a holographic substrate.
These encoded patterns
determine where
stars and galaxies and
interstellar structures
of the universe are formed.
They give birth to the
forms of our universe
at almost every scale.
That's pretty cool.
What strikes me about
all of this more
recent scientific approach
to the holographic model,
though, is that
scientists are now so
focused on that
lower-dimensional encoding
of information, meaning the
two-dimensional surface waves,
rather than on the
level of true reality
where the encoding
actually came from.
They might be one step closer,
but they are still attached
to the explicate order.
This attachment or bias
towards materiality
prevents them from
piercing the veil
to discover the implicate order.
Have we reached
the limits to what
object-based approach of
physics can directly observe?
Quite possibly yes,
at least for now.
Can pure mathematics
and geometry
serve as a way to
gain deeper insight?
Perhaps.
Or have we come
to the point where
we must cross the bridge
from the world of physics
into the world of
metaphysics to gain insight?
In the mystery
school tradition, we
explore many esoteric
questions that
arise from concepts like these.
For example, we could
ask if this world
is a holographic projection,
where is the real me?
Clearly, I'm not the image
you see on your screen.
The holographic principle says
I'm not leaving this body that
is here in the studio at Gaia.
Does that mean that we
are just information
encoded on some two-dimensional
boundary only appearing as 3D?
Maybe our body
might be the result
of encoded information
such as in our DNA,
but we are not our body.
We are much more than this.
Could our true self be that
original illuminated form
which the hologram is
simply an encoding of?
This feels closer to
the greater truth.
If this is the case, then
where is our original form?
Who are we?
What are we?
These are the kinds of questions
that initiates and sages have
been asking for millennia.
The famous depth psychologist
from their early 1900s,
Carl Jung, studied deeply
into questions like these.
He drew from the mystery
school tradition of alchemy
and the shamanic tradition
of dream interpretation.
Jung observed that similar
images, symbols, and motifs
were showing up in dreams
of several of his patients.
He also knew that many of
these images and symbols
had been used in alchemical
artwork from the Middle Ages
as well as many
ancient mythologies
from around the world.
Jung realized they all
pointed to similar themes
or specific
transformational processes
that must be part of a
collective or universal nature.
These universal images,
symbols, and themes
are the ways in which we
receive information from what
are called archetypes.
The word archetype goes back
to at least ancient Greek
and means an original
form, model, or pattern
from which copies are made.
These archetypes are
the original forms that
operate in higher dimensions.
They communicate
to and through us
via symbols,
synchronicities, and patterns
that interact with our psyche.
We can also use these
archetypal symbols and patterns
to communicate back
to the higher realms.
By correctly incorporating them
into practices such as ritual,
guided visualizations, the
use of active imagination,
and even magical
talismans, they become
like calling cards or
links to the higher realms.
In the magical
arts and sciences,
using symbols in
this way is known
as sympathetic magic,
which relates to the idea
that at a spiritual level--
like attracts like.
Jung called the realm where
these archetypes reside
the collective unconscious.
We are all connected to
it through our psyche
or in what today's
terminology we
might call our consciousness.
But there is a difference
between consciousness
as we experience it in
our thoughts, dreams,
or imagination and
the underlying essence
of consciousness itself.
We might call this
underlying essence
pure awareness or spirit
intelligence which operates
at the archetypal level.
These archetypes
or original forms
have also been referred to in
various spiritual traditions
as gods, as angelic beings,
and as forces of creation.
Our original form, our true
self, our eternal being
resides here at the
archetypal level
in the sea of
collective unconscious.
From a physics
standpoint, that sea
is the depths of
the quantum sea,
the ocean of the multiverse.
Now, as the archetypes move in
that sea, they create waves.
Then as coherent energy from
source shines upon them,
their information and
interference patterns
get encoded on the
surface of that sea.
Consciousness, matter, and
all the forms and forces
we experience in this realm
are just projections or ripple
effects from these waves of
that infinite quantum sea.
But the encoding
level is the level
of our eternal divine being,
and that is the part of us
that we must get
back in tune with.
What about the
illuminating source
that provides the
coherent energy wave
needed to create the encoding?
What is that?
Now, coherent energy means
that is of one frequency
and fully synchronized
like we might
find in a laser of either
light or acoustic energy.
In the kabbalistic
tradition it is
called Ein Sof which means
infinite and without end.
Whatever we call it, let's just
say source to make it easy.
"It" is transcendent.
Meaning it also resides
beyond our universe,
yet it projects itself
into our universe
by sending out
its rays of energy
in order to bring all
the archetypal forms
and potentials from the
quantum sea into expression.
Here we come to perhaps the
biggest question of all?
Can we influence the hologram?
Can we change things?
And how does our consciousness
fit into all of this?
In physics today, there
is something known
as the measurement problem.
It's a problem to
traditional scientists
because it says that our
universe is participatory.
What we observe is
determined by how
we set up the experiment or
the way we choose to observe.
What it says is
that consciousness
does influence what information
emerges from the hologram.
However, that
doesn't necessarily
mean we are changing it.
It could just be that
our choices are simply
moving it or tuning into
different frequency levels
like turning the
dial on the radio
to tune in to a
different station.
The information being
broadcast from that station
was always there, but
we only perceive it
when we change the
dial to that frequency.
These are examples that show
us of how our choices might
be giving us a slightly
different perspective
of information as
opposed to changing
things at a fundamental level.
Still, if there truly is
a universal connectedness
as science now confirms, then
if we can change ourselves,
this must have an
impact on the whole.
This brings us to the hermetic
Principle of Correspondence
from the 8,000-year-old
lineage of Hermes.
This is the famous "as
above, so below" principle.
It can also be stated as
the inner, so the outer, as
the outer, so the inner,
or as the microcosm,
so the macrocosm.
Remember, one of the defining
features of a hologram
is that every part
contains the same pattern
or information as the whole.
This is what "as
above, so below" means.
So the principle
of correspondence
is a holographic principle.
And the hologram is both
inside and outside--
as the inner, so the outer.
In the hermetic lineage, we
have many tools and teachings
about how to shift
the inner so that we
can influence the outer.
The hermetic ray or
path is about purity.
We seek to purify
our mind and life
so that we can truly express our
multi-dimensional potentials.
Rather than saying that the
problem is outside of us
or even in the
holographic encoding,
the real issue is the way in
which we each distort its image
through our filters, fears,
and imbalances stored
in that subconscious mind.
What if our original encoding
is full of goodness and beauty
and strength?
What if we are simply
blocking ourselves
from experiencing the fullness
of our true form here?
And if that's the case, our task
is not to change the hologram
but simply to clean up our
filters and blocks so that we
can actually express
our original blueprints
in their pure and whole form.
The kabbalistic tradition
talks about something
called tikkun which means
to rectify, repair, or heal.
The tree of life
is a pattern that
can be applied at many
scales holographically.
One of those ways
we can apply it
is to our mind and perceptions.
In this model, the top
of the tree of life
is called the supernal
triad, and this represents
the realm of source energy.
The very bottom
point on the tree
represents the physical kingdom,
the world in which we live.
Everything in-between
represents levels of soul
which includes the
mind and how it works.
This is like our
operating system--
the applications
and memory files--
it's the software programs.
We can think of each of these
spheres as lenses or mirrors
or applications that take
in the light from source
and then pass that
down to the next level.
If any of those spheres
are distorted, cracked,
or faulty in their
intended function,
then that skews or
blocks the light
as it comes down
to the physical.
Kabbalah teaches
us that our mission
is to repair those spheres so
that the light can flow down
in its fullness and purity.
When we take up this work
of healing and repairing
our filters, our
mind and our soul,
we will then automatically
begin to manifest
more of the divine light
that flows from source.
These are truly the first
steps of the initiate
as we progress on our path to
understanding the mysteries
of ourselves and the universe--
the microcosm and the macrocosm.
The more alive and
awakened we become,
the more we feel
called to serve others
and to help them to do the same.
Thus the higher
steps of progression
on the path of
initiation is to move
into higher levels of
service in the light
so that we can aid in the
awakening of humanity.
The more we heal and realign
with our true light and true
self, the more we can manifest
that light into this world
and build a better
world, one based
on our wholeness and divinity
rather than on separation
and ego.
Our task in this
hologram is to become
more pure and complete image
or expression of the whole.
Join me again as we discover
how to access the quantum
gap and the infinite
potential contained
within the zero-point
field or quantum sea.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of the universe with me in this
episode of "Mystery Teachings."